You are listening to radio lab radio lab
from W N Y s
n p. R. Hey, here we are post hurricane.
I'm Jad Abumrad. I'm Robert Krulwich, Radiolab podcast. And today,
nope. You Ain't call this a character study, I suppose. Yeah,
it comes from our producer Sean Cole. Hello. Hey. So, uh,
start us off stories about Mel Blanc. Very man of,
of many. You know who that is? No, I don't. He,
you don't know who mill blank is? Why should I know who he is? No,
you do know who he is because of what he did. What did he do?
He was the voice of
bugs bunny and
porky pig. Yosemite Sam.
That'd be the Pew. You smelled me out to little sandy pale.
Bester. Oh, can you put it back? I'll say go away, boy. You me. Oh, corn.
Leghorns that was all one guy.
Shit. Wow. Okay. So what's, uh,
what's the story dude? I'm nowhere near done with this woody woodpecker.
Mel Blank, Barney rebel, Nell blank. Dino the dinosaur.
Mel Blank. And on the other side of the anachronistic spectrum,
you guys won't believe this. He was Mr Spacely for the Jetson? Yes. Czechian.
Let's see. I'll put the antifreeze speed bug in the cupboards. Secret Squirrel,
right? Chief captain, Caveman.
It's with you from buck Rogers if you ever watched that. Yeah.
What about the bomb coli? This guy was like the voice of my childhood voice says
[inaudible] a crowd. Oh my gosh.
My Dad got so many requests to do so many voices. This is no blank.
Mel's son is only kid. Actually,
kids would come to the door literally every single day and he answered the door
and talk to the kids and then up at big bear where we are now.
When the tour boats come, just like they do now, we'd get on the megaphone,
do the characters and say hi to all the tourists, you know, 12 times a day.
Holy Long. That's how many tour boats we have. No, and you do voices too?
I do a few of the voices that they might be easy to daddy it. It does.
And did. He did. He did 1500 voices. 1500 yeah.
I copy a few of them and there's a bunch of us that do different voices and we'd
never been able to really sound like exactly like him.
So it took many of you to be one of whom? I can't. Oh my gosh, yes.
I do bugs porky Daffy tweety Sylvester.
But there's other people that do it too and all of them sound, you know,
if he goes, he went jump doc, you know,
it can sound real close to him, but then when you start to do sentences,
it becomes very difficult for anybody to sound like him because everybody has
their own voiceprint.
Okay.
And Mel had his own voiceprint.
Yeah.
But this isn't really a story about voices or it is,
but not in the way that you think.
It's really about what it's like to breathe life into a character and whether
that character can breathe life back into. You
see back in 1961 dad and I had smell and knoll went into business together
producing radio commercials.
Funny commercials cause humorous commercials weren't really being done at that
time. Very few. So we decided to start to do that.
We send out all the brochures and that's the week.
Yeah, the same week that mill
[inaudible],
he had a head on collision and dead man's curve at UCLA.
Where was, where was he headed?
He had just finished a recording session in San Francisco.
He had flown to San Francisco early in the morning, came back,
ate dinner with my mom and then rushed back out to do another recording session
and a a kid in a 98 Oldsmobile gigantic car,
lost control on dead man's head. On collision.
My Dad was in an Aston Martin, which was an aluminum
bodied English car and it folded right up. They had to cut him out of there.
Luckily he was only a block from the UCLA Hospital.
Is that like the jaws of life kind of mapped there? Yeah, yeah.
They gave him a thousand to one chance of survival and he broke virtually every
bone in his body. Well, I think that was more than a slight exaggeration,
but from his point of view, it probably felt just like that.
This is Lewis Conway, Louis W. Conway. Uh,
I do very little these days. He's a doctor. Before I retired,
I was a neurosurgeon and he was on the floor at UCLA Medical Center back then.
I was a resident, he was like 29 at the time.
I think I was the first one to see, know blank in the emergency room,
completely unrecognizable at the time, you know,
blood and Gore and so forth. So we cleaned them out and uh,
then it became clear that he was, uh, going to be a major, um,
celebrity in the place providing I kept him alive.
No.
When you show up at the hospital, what's the first,
how are you greeted there by a lot of flashing cameras and that,
that all of a sudden I knew something was really bad. I met my mom.
We went inside. There were a lot of people there, the papers and uh,
because they thought it was going to die. In fact,
there was an obituary written in the Honolulu Harold that said,
bugs bunny's dead. That was the headline headline.
And it must have been really frequent. Yeah.
Oh yeah, totally. So was my mind. I remember just, we couldn't believe it.
And he was Ashen Gray. He didn't look like he was gonna make it at all.
The doctors didn't manage to get him stabilized, but he was unconscious.
He was in a coma. So
we just stayed there, ran home, take a shower,
come back for one day and then the next and then the next,
we were at the hospital for about two weeks and, uh, trying to talk. Yeah.
Can you hear us man? It was always, can you hear me dad? Can you hear me?
I mean, deeply unconscious, not responding. I Call Him Dad, pop father,
whatever it is. Male. We try to do any, anything, not opening his eyes.
And there was really no response and it became possible that he would never
respond. But, uh, after about 14 days,
a doctor came in, he was a resident, Dr. Conway, this is me, the resident,
he was a resident and he went over to Mel's bed and for whatever reason,
maybe just to mix things up, I said to him, uh,
without any real reason to suspect he would know what I was saying.
I said to him, bugs, bugs bunny.
How are you doing today? And I'll be darned if mail didn't go
my stamp.
GOC He responded as bugs quite clearly.
What anyone porky. Are you there? Dad said I can g I can hear it.
I can eat. Tweety are you here tiny? I put each hand popcorn.
Lakehorn I pay attention son.
You see that house over there that says d o g that spells chicken.
He said all that you have bugs. Daffy, porky,
tweety Sylvester. All these characters you went through about six characters.
Are you standing there watching this? Yeah. Oh yeah.
And what's going through your mind at that? Well,
I'm so excited that he's able to, that he came out of the coma. How so?
You're going to feel when he hasn't done anything for 14 days,
really hasn't been conscious and then all of a sudden he's conscious doing these
characters and then according to Noah,
after doing the characters for a few moments, he just came back. Where am I?
What happened as Mel. Oh, okay. You're at UCLA or in a traffic accident. Oh,
was anybody else hurt? No, the boy had a scratch knee. I see what?
We're just a sec here. When he said, uh,
what's up doc was do, do you,
was that Mel Blanc talking or was that bugs bunny inside Mel Blanc?
That's the the question. And then,
and it's a question that actually came back again 23 years later,
Mr. Bell Blank,
this is your life on TV on this show.
This is your life that you've heard of.
And they bring out a celebrity and then they take to this liberty's family and
everybody they work with and they say like, Hey,
remember this and remember or that now's funny.
Voices used to drive our high school principal crazy. And you know,
it's all very light marrying and fun until at 8:29 PM January 24th,
1961 it all comes to a crashing halt.
They start talking about the car accident and they call the doctor out to the
stage surgeon,
Dr. Lewis Conway interstage right to tell the full comma story and the host says
doc, like, what did you think when this all happened? I was astonished.
Mel was dying and it seemed as though bugs bunny was trying to save his life.
That,
that is the idea that has survived more than any other part of the story.
That's the thing that keeps coming back and back and it's like, wait a second.
Like what? What does it mean? What does it mean?
And it just presents all of these questions like,
who is Mel Really? Who is bugs bunny?
Really is when you make somebody up d do they compete with you in some way
compete and win, right, exactly.
Is that more deeply in Male than Mel is? Do you know what I mean?
Yeah, totally. I brought Dr. Conway back to that moment.
The same as though bugs bunny was trying to save his life.
I don't remember saying that,
but [inaudible] do you think there's anything to that?
Well, uh, I, I don't really know that bugs bunny was that skillful,
but, uh, so I basically say not much to it.
I don't think so. Ask Noel. It's, it's an interesting headline.
Bugs bunny saves mill. Um, he didn't save his life,
but he certainly got him out of the coma.
Then he told me something that does feed into the idea that these characters to
had minds of their own. Well, uh, he says as a kid,
he would watch his dad perform and every time he became those characters,
I could turn the sound off in a booth where you couldn't hear him,
just turn the speakers off and watch him and know exactly what character is
doing because his whole body would metamorphosize to that character.
He looked like bugs bunny when he was doing bugs. He looked just like you,
somebody, Sam, when he was doing a 70 Sam,
he became really small and timid when he was doing tweety.
Tillys he was sort of like a method actor. Yeah, sort of. I mean,
the way no described it. It was like these characters momentarily inhabited him.
So I think they were part of him basically. But still,
what I don't want to get though is why would he respond to what's up the bugs
rather than like, what's up Mel? Or what's up dad or what's up honey.
You know what I mean? That's, that's a difficult question. Uh,
you know, I, I wish I could answer it. No.
[inaudible] really want to go there anyway. What,
what other questions do you have? I'm like,
you were stuck on that one and I kind of am stuck on it. Um,
and I know that it's not a question anybody can ultimately answer,
but I called up this guy,
this is Orrin Devinsky at NYU Medical Center,
a neurologist that we sometimes throw questions like this too.
And I ran them through the whole scenario that this guy comes into the room and
says, hi bugs bunny, how are you doing today? And he says, oh,
what's up deck?
Interesting.
So he batted around in his head for awhile and then he said, well, you know,
I might have something to do with queues
like getting, getting the cues mixed up. What do you mean? Well,
first of all,
her for a few weeks speaks to a very significant brain injury.
And what orange often sees with people who have had brain injuries like males,
is that they lose the ability to read the cues that tell them who they're
supposed to be. When dad at home, boss at the office, bugs in the studio,
whatever.
Here's a man who no longer has his ability to differentiate social cues of right
and wrong of, of when to be bugs bunny and when not to be bugs bunny,
where he is and where he isn't.
You have to keep in mind that when he was working,
this is a guy who was getting queued all the time.
He was doing 18 radio shows a week at one time. Wow.
So he just be running down the street from ABC to CBS to NBC and uh,
they'd hand him a script and he'd run on stage and do it.
I'm a little tech
[inaudible] a private side side.
We had those characters buried in himself that could come out surface incredibly
fast on a dime. Yeah. Here's the script. That's the character. Yeah.
So if he's got all these characters hanging around in his head,
just waiting for the right queue and in his head,
that part of the brain that interprets the cues is all messed up. Oh No.
Maybe in a way when Dr. Conway said Bugs Bunny, how are you doing today?
Maybe the way Mel heard it was, hey Mel,
you're wrong.
In his mind time, I have been the director at the time for all I know,
even the good doctor went along with this one.
It's as though he was given permission to talk now because it was his time to
talk. So,
so on one level it,
it's obviously crazy to think that bugs bunny saved his life because after all
he was just a cartoon character. But whether or not those characters saved him,
I mean in that moment they were the most essential part of him you could say.
Because when the rest of Mel was adrift and sort of lost in the ether,
bugs was there. He was ready to go to work,
which makes perfect sense to Orrin Devinsky.
I mean that was a rehearsed thing that he did once.
Once you practice things long enough, they,
they kind of become automatic and lower portions of the brain.
And that's why when the higher brains injured,
sometimes these lower brain functions can come out so,
so beautifully because they have been kind of wired in over time.
So the bugs bunny voice was, was perfectly preserved. Deep inside
bugs bunny is like crystallized and kept over here and a protective jar away
from the rattling cage of the brain.
Exactly. You went down into the safe.
So what had ended up happening to Mel? Well,
he took a long time to recover and then I was in a body cast for, Gosh,
seven months. And, but he, he worked the entire time. I mean,
he never stopped working there bringing the equipment.
I brought the equipment in, dangled a mic over the bed and uh,
he started to work there.
In fact, the first 65 Flintstones,
you would never know this Barney in real life. What's on your mind, Bonnie?
I'm kind of busy. Was flat on his back in a body cast,
just passing by on my way to shoot a doctor. The doctor.
What's the matter with you, Bonnie boy. And then in 1989 for the first time,
Knoll and Mel both were starring in this commercial for Oldsmobile.
Mel's 81 in the shtick. They did a bunch of these. The shtick was, you know,
not your father's Oldsmobile.
We did the commercial. It took us all day to do it,
and he had just gotten over the flu. So he wasn't feeling that great.
And I says, dad, why don't you run over to the doctor?
So he goes over the doctor and I called the doctor. I says, what's his story?
He says, well, he's okay. He's fine. I can give him a shot and send them home,
but I'd love to clear his lungs out.
So why don't we just put them in the hospital overnight, clear his lungs out,
and then send them home. So I talked to my dad as soon as you want to do that,
he says, well, okay, what the heck? I'll see you in the morning. Pop. Oh yeah,
got there the next morning about seven 30 I says, how do you feel? He says,
my leg hurts.
This is why the nurses at the hospital forgot to put up the bed rails on the
side of the bed. Well, you know how high a hospital bed is.
He had fallen out of the bed and broken his femur fat envelope had got into the
brain by that time and within 48 hours he was basically almost brain dead.
Yeah.
[inaudible]
during the next couple of days, he'd come in and out of his coma
or in and out of his sleep and
I tried to rouse him with the characters like the doctor had 30 years earlier.
Yeah. Bugs. Are you in there? Yeah,
it was very difficult at that time because he's 30 years older now.
He's 81 years old and uh,
it was difficult to revive him after each time that he would fall back to sleep
again.
And just before his dad passed away and all says that Mel looked at him and in
the voice of Yosemite Sam, he said, no, I love you. And that was about it.
Oh my God.
It was the last character he did and the last character on film or recorded
character,
which was in that ultimate Beal out I told you about was porky saying that's all
folks. And that's what his tombstone says too.
That's all folks.
Wow.
[inaudible]
thank you, Sean Cole. Shawn does some good voices himself. He does,
but we won't share them with you. Not In the company of Mr Mel Blank.
[inaudible]
very, very big. Thanks to uh, no blanc, Mel blank son and to Dr. Lewis Conway,
the doctor and to Roberts boyfriend or an Devinsky. That's an inside joke.
Do like Gordon. Oh. And a huge thanks to Mel blank himself,
wherever he may be for all those voices that populated our youth.
I'm Jad Abumrad I'm Robert Krulwich. Thanks for listening.